readme.md, before:

# Kohi Game Engine

<img src="images/kohi_wordmark_colour.png?raw=true" alt="Kohi Logo" height=100/>

This engine is made as part of the Kohi Game Engine series on YouTube (now live-streamed on Twitch), where we make a game engine from the ground up using C and Vulkan.

The name **Kohi** (コーヒー, pronounced "koh-hee") is a simplification of the Japanese word for "coffee", which makes sense given how much I love the stuff.

The original YouTube series is located here: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dHPuU-DJoBM&list=PLv8Ddw9K0JPg1BEO-RS-0MYs423cvLVtj.

The Twitch stream happens here: https://twitch.tv/travisvroman.

![Screenshot of Kohi](/images/kohi_screenshot_2.png?raw=true "Screenshot of Kohi")
![Screenshot of Kohi](/images/kohi_screenshot.png?raw=true "Screenshot of Kohi")

## Important Links

### Socials

[![Twitch](/images/media_icon_twitch_name.png?raw=true)](https://twitch.tv/travisvroman)
[![YouTube](/images/media_icon_yt_name.png?raw=true)](https://youtube.com/travisvroman)
[![Patreon](/images/media_icon_patreon_name.png?raw=true)](https://patreon.com/travisvroman)
[![Twitter](/images/media_icon_tw_name.png?raw=true)](https://twitter.com/travisvroman)

- Discord: https://discord.com/invite/YBMH9Em

### Project Links

- Website: https://kohiengine.com
- API Documentation: https://kohiengine.com/docs/

# Plan

Kohi has been a 3D engine from the start, with most of it built from scratch. There will be many explanations and explorations along the way. The series starts off as more of a tutorial to get up and running, with explanations becoming higher level as things progress to keep the pacing up. We eventually transition to live-streaming on Twitch, with most coding being done on stream with some offline work that is less interesting being done offline.

## Platform support

Windows, Linux and macOS are all officially supported. Android and iOS runtime support may also be added down the road.

# Getting Started

## Prerequisites

While the highest effort is made to reduce dependencies, each platform requires utilities that _must_ be configured prior to building:

- [Clang](https://clang.llvm.org/)
- [Git](https://git-scm.com/)
- [Make](https://www.gnu.org/software/make/)
- [OpenAL](https://www.openal.org/)
- [Vulkan SDK](https://vulkan.lunarg.com/sdk/home)

Each platform's section will breifly cover getting set up with these prerequisites.

Note that you are free to use other compilers (such as gcc), but they are not officially supported at this time.

### Preparing the build environment for Windows
More information is available in [Kohi Episode 001](https://youtu.be/F6_WdnzQIQ4)

Download and install the following utlities:

- [Clang/LLVM](https://releases.llvm.org/download.html) (Select `Add LLVM to system PATH for all users` during installation)
- [Git for Windows](https://gitforwindows.org/)
- [Make for Windows](https://gnuwin32.sourceforge.net/packages/make.htm)
- [OpenAL SDK](https://www.openal.org/downloads/)
- [Visual Studio Community](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/vs/community/) (Select the `Desktop development with C++` workload during installation)
- [Vulkan SDK](https://vulkan.lunarg.com/sdk/home#windows)

Add the Make `bin` directory to your Path Environment Variable:
 - Search for `Edit the system environment variables`
 - Select `Enviroment Variables...` (near the bottom)
 - Under `System variables`, double-click the `Path` option
 - Click `New`
 - Enter the Make `bin` directory (`C:\Program Files (x86)\GnuWin32\bin`)
 - Press `OK` then `OK` then `OK`

Clone the repositiory to your desired location
```
cd Documents
git clone https://github.com/travisvroman/kohi.git
```

### Preparing the build environment for Linux
More information is available in [Kohi Episode 002](https://youtu.be/NIv1mygBOcg)

Install the following utilities using your package manager:

- `clang`
- `git`
- `make`
- `libx11-dev`
- `libxkbcommon-x11-dev`
- `libx11-xcb-dev`
- `libopenal-dev`

The following commands will automatically install the required packages using apt
```
sudo apt update
sudo apt upgrade
sudo apt install clang git make libx11-dev libxkbcommon-x11-dev libx11-xcb-dev libopenal-dev
```

Download and extract Vulkan SDK. The following commands will automatically download and extract VulkanSDK 1.3.290.0

```
curl -o vulkansdk.tar.xz https://sdk.lunarg.com/sdk/download/1.3.290.0/linux/vulkansdk-linux-x86_64-1.3.290.0.tar.xz
mkdir vulkansdk
tar xf vulkansdk.tar.xz -C vulkansdk
```

Setup the environment variables for Vulkan SDK using the included script:
```
source vulkansdk/1.3.290.0/setup-env.sh
```

Clone the repositiory to your desired location
```
cd Documents
git clone https://github.com/travisvroman/kohi.git
```

### Preparing the build environment for macOS
More information is available in [Kohi Episode 076](https://youtu.be/g9tvP4qf5sA)

Install these via homebrew or other package manager:

- `git`
- `make`
- `openal-soft`

The following commands will install the packaged using homebrew.
```
brew install openal-soft
brew install git
brew install make
```

Clone the repositiory to your desired location
```
cd Documents
git clone https://github.com/travisvroman/kohi.git
```

## Building
There are 2 build types available, Debug and Release. Debug includes debug symbols and is optimal for development and exploration, while Release is ideal for performance. There is also a "clean" utility available to clean out the built files, which is useful when switching between Debug/Release, or when strange linking errors occur because of missing files (i.e. switching branches).

### Building for Windows

Open up a command prompt or Powershell instance and run the `build-debug.bat` file for a debug build, or `build-release.bat` for a release build.
There is also a `clean.bat` available.

Alternatively, there are tasks available for Visual Studio Code (`Ctrl+Shift+B`)

### Building for Linux/macOS
Open up a terminal and run the `build-debug.sh` file for a debug build, or `build-release.sh` for a release build.
There is also a `clean.sh` available.

Alternatively, there are tasks available for Visual Studio Code (`Ctrl+Shift+B`)

## Running

At the moment, "Testbed" is the executable that uses Kohi. It should be run with the working directory of `bin`. In your terminal, use `cd bin` to navigate to the bin folder, then run `testbed.exe` on Windows or `./testbed.kapp` for Linux/macOS.

# Project Structure

This structure breakdown is based on the root folder of the repository. Some files/folders are omitted from this description as they aren't important to the overall picture.

- `kohi.core` - Shared library/.dll. Contains types, containers, string lib, math lib, utils, etc. as well as the platform layer (Win32, Linux, macOS).
- `kohi.core.tests` - A small collection of unit tests for the core library. Needs to be expanded.
- `kohi.runtime` - Shared library/.dll. Contains the core engine logic as well as many of the core engine systems.
- `kohi.plugin.audio.openal` - Shared library/.dll. Contains the audio plugin which uses OpenAL as the audio backend.
- `kohi.plugin.renderer.vulkan` - Shared library/.dll. Contains the Vulkan renderer plugin, which serves as the renderer backend to the engine for Vulkan.
- `kohi.plugin.ui.standard` - Shared library/.dll. Contains the Kohi Standard UI, which contains a general-use collection of controls such as buttons, labels, textboxes, etc. This is a retained-mode UI.
- `testbed.assets` - Contains all assets to be loaded by the testbed application.
- `testbed.kapp` - Application/.exe. The consuming application executable, loads up testbed.klib, configures/uses plugins and other Kohi libraries.
- `testbed.klib` = Shared library/.dll. Contains the application code (or "game code") specific to the application. Hot-reloadable.
- `kohi.tools.versiongen` - Application/.exe. A small utility which generates a version using passed-in major and minor version numbers, and auto-generated build and revision numbers based on date and time. Used to version builds of Kohi and plugins.
- `kohi.tools` - A collection of command-line tools. Mostly empty at the moment, but will be expended when editor development begins.
- `.vscode` A folder containing VS Code-specific project setup.

## Roadmap

See [here](TODO.md).

## Goal

The goal here is simple, to provide a resource that I wish I had when learning game development; a complete guide on building a game engine from scratch, including not only design decisions, but _why_ those decisions were made. It should also be noted that, while this is _a_ way of building a game engine, it is not _the only_ way to build one.

Of course, there is also the goal of having a game engine capable of making games. Once the project is far enough along, making a game will be done as a series on my YouTube channel as well.

It is important to note that this engine is not, and will not be for quite a while, production-ready. It is a learning tool and as such is not yet optimized for use in production-quality products. This will eventually change, but for now it is _not_ production-ready.

## Contributions

As the project progresses, community contributions are welcome via
[Pull Requests](https://github.com/travisvroman/kohi/pulls) on GitHub.

Features should be contributed via a branch name in the format of `feature/<feature name>` where `<feature name>` is replaced with either the name of a feature or, ideally, the number of a reported feature issue (ex: `feature/80` or `feature/terrain`).

Bug fixes _must_ be contributed via a branch name in the format of `bugfix/<issue#>` where `<issue#>` is replaced with the number of a reported feature issue (ex: `bugfix/80`). Bug fixes therefore _must_ have an associated issue created on GitHub.

Code should match the general style of the code in the repo. A code style guide will
be published here at some point in the near future.

All contributions are subject to review and may or may not be accepted, or have change requests made before being accepted.

## Support Me

I am developing Kohi in my spare time. I don't have any sponsors at the moment. If you like my work, please feel free to support me in these places:

- [Patreon](https://patreon.com/travisvroman)
- [Ko-fi](https://ko-fi.com/travisvroman)
- [YouTube membership](https://www.youtube.com/TravisVroman/join)
- [Subscribe on Twitch](https://www.twitch.tv/products/travisvroman)
- [Sponsor via GitHub](https://github.com/sponsors/travisvroman)

I would also greatly appreciate follows/subscriptions on YouTube and Twitch. Please spread the word!

Your support is greatly appreciated and will be re-invested back into the project.

Commit message:

Improved "Preparing the build environment for Windows"

readme.md, after:

# Kohi Game Engine

<img src="images/kohi_wordmark_colour.png?raw=true" alt="Kohi Logo" height=100/>

This engine is made as part of the Kohi Game Engine series on YouTube (now live-streamed on Twitch), where we make a game engine from the ground up using C and Vulkan.

The name **Kohi** (コーヒー, pronounced "koh-hee") is a simplification of the Japanese word for "coffee", which makes sense given how much I love the stuff.

The original YouTube series is located here: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dHPuU-DJoBM&list=PLv8Ddw9K0JPg1BEO-RS-0MYs423cvLVtj.

The Twitch stream happens here: https://twitch.tv/travisvroman.

![Screenshot of Kohi](/images/kohi_screenshot_2.png?raw=true "Screenshot of Kohi")
![Screenshot of Kohi](/images/kohi_screenshot.png?raw=true "Screenshot of Kohi")

## Important Links

### Socials

[![Twitch](/images/media_icon_twitch_name.png?raw=true)](https://twitch.tv/travisvroman)
[![YouTube](/images/media_icon_yt_name.png?raw=true)](https://youtube.com/travisvroman)
[![Patreon](/images/media_icon_patreon_name.png?raw=true)](https://patreon.com/travisvroman)
[![Twitter](/images/media_icon_tw_name.png?raw=true)](https://twitter.com/travisvroman)

- Discord: https://discord.com/invite/YBMH9Em

### Project Links

- Website: https://kohiengine.com
- API Documentation: https://kohiengine.com/docs/

# Plan

Kohi has been a 3D engine from the start, with most of it built from scratch. There will be many explanations and explorations along the way. The series starts off as more of a tutorial to get up and running, with explanations becoming higher level as things progress to keep the pacing up. We eventually transition to live-streaming on Twitch, with most coding being done on stream with some offline work that is less interesting being done offline.

## Platform support

Windows, Linux and macOS are all officially supported. Android and iOS runtime support may also be added down the road.

# Getting Started

## Prerequisites

While the highest effort is made to reduce dependencies, each platform requires utilities that _must_ be configured prior to building:

- [Clang](https://clang.llvm.org/)
- [Git](https://git-scm.com/)
- [Make](https://www.gnu.org/software/make/)
- [OpenAL](https://www.openal.org/)
- [Vulkan SDK](https://vulkan.lunarg.com/sdk/home)

Each platform's section will breifly cover getting set up with these prerequisites.

Note that you are free to use other compilers (such as gcc), but they are not officially supported at this time.

### Preparing the build environment for Windows
More information is available in [Kohi Episode 001](https://youtu.be/F6_WdnzQIQ4)

Download and install the following utlities:

- [Clang/LLVM](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project/releases/latest)<sup>1</sup>
- [Git for Windows](https://gitforwindows.org/)
- [Make for Windows](https://gnuwin32.sourceforge.net/downlinks/make.php)<sup>2</sup>
- [OpenAL SDK](https://www.openal.org/downloads/OpenAL11CoreSDK.zip)
- [Visual Studio Build Tools](https://aka.ms/vs/17/release/vs_BuildTools.exe)<sup>3</sup>
- [Vulkan SDK](https://vulkan.lunarg.com/sdk/home#windows)

 ---

- <sup>1</sup> Select `Add LLVM to system PATH for all users` during installation

- <sup>2</sup> You will need to add the Make `bin` directory to your Path Environment Variable after installation:
  - Use the Windows Search bar to search for `Edit the system environment variables` or run this command: `SystemPropertiesAdvanced`
  - Select `Enviroment Variables...` (near the bottom)
  - Under the `System variables` section, double-click the `Path` option
  - Click `New`
  - Enter the Make `bin` directory (which should be `C:\Program Files (x86)\GnuWin32\bin` by default)
  - Press `OK` then `OK` then `OK`

- <sup>3</sup> Select the `Desktop development with C++` workload during installation, or use this command to automatically install the minimum necessary Visual Studio Build Tools packages:
```
winget install Microsoft.VisualStudio.2022.BuildTools --force --override "--wait --passive --add Microsoft.VisualStudio.Component.VC.Tools.x86.x64 --add Microsoft.VisualStudio.Component.Windows10SDK.20348"
```

---

Clone the repositiory to your desired location
```
cd Documents
git clone https://github.com/travisvroman/kohi.git
```

### Preparing the build environment for Linux
More information is available in [Kohi Episode 002](https://youtu.be/NIv1mygBOcg)

Install the following utilities using your package manager:

- `clang`
- `git`
- `make`
- `libx11-dev`
- `libxkbcommon-x11-dev`
- `libx11-xcb-dev`
- `libopenal-dev`

The following commands will automatically install the required packages using apt
```
sudo apt update
sudo apt upgrade
sudo apt install clang git make libx11-dev libxkbcommon-x11-dev libx11-xcb-dev libopenal-dev
```

Download and extract Vulkan SDK. The following commands will automatically download and extract VulkanSDK 1.3.290.0

```
curl -o vulkansdk.tar.xz https://sdk.lunarg.com/sdk/download/1.3.290.0/linux/vulkansdk-linux-x86_64-1.3.290.0.tar.xz
mkdir vulkansdk
tar xf vulkansdk.tar.xz -C vulkansdk
```

Setup the environment variables for Vulkan SDK using the included script:
```
source vulkansdk/1.3.290.0/setup-env.sh
```

Clone the repositiory to your desired location
```
cd Documents
git clone https://github.com/travisvroman/kohi.git
```

### Preparing the build environment for macOS
More information is available in [Kohi Episode 076](https://youtu.be/g9tvP4qf5sA)

Install these via homebrew or other package manager:

- `git`
- `make`
- `openal-soft`

The following commands will install the packaged using homebrew.
```
brew install openal-soft
brew install git
brew install make
```

Clone the repositiory to your desired location
```
cd Documents
git clone https://github.com/travisvroman/kohi.git
```

## Building
There are 2 build types available, Debug and Release. Debug includes debug symbols and is optimal for development and exploration, while Release is ideal for performance. There is also a "clean" utility available to clean out the built files, which is useful when switching between Debug/Release, or when strange linking errors occur because of missing files (i.e. switching branches).

### Building for Windows

Open up a command prompt or Powershell instance and run the `build-debug.bat` file for a debug build, or `build-release.bat` for a release build.
There is also a `clean.bat` available.

Alternatively, there are tasks available for Visual Studio Code (`Ctrl+Shift+B`)

### Building for Linux/macOS
Open up a terminal and run the `build-debug.sh` file for a debug build, or `build-release.sh` for a release build.
There is also a `clean.sh` available.

Alternatively, there are tasks available for Visual Studio Code (`Ctrl+Shift+B`)

## Running

At the moment, "Testbed" is the executable that uses Kohi. It should be run with the working directory of `bin`. In your terminal, use `cd bin` to navigate to the bin folder, then run `testbed.exe` on Windows or `./testbed.kapp` for Linux/macOS.

# Project Structure

This structure breakdown is based on the root folder of the repository. Some files/folders are omitted from this description as they aren't important to the overall picture.

- `kohi.core` - Shared library/.dll. Contains types, containers, string lib, math lib, utils, etc. as well as the platform layer (Win32, Linux, macOS).
- `kohi.core.tests` - A small collection of unit tests for the core library. Needs to be expanded.
- `kohi.runtime` - Shared library/.dll. Contains the core engine logic as well as many of the core engine systems.
- `kohi.plugin.audio.openal` - Shared library/.dll. Contains the audio plugin which uses OpenAL as the audio backend.
- `kohi.plugin.renderer.vulkan` - Shared library/.dll. Contains the Vulkan renderer plugin, which serves as the renderer backend to the engine for Vulkan.
- `kohi.plugin.ui.standard` - Shared library/.dll. Contains the Kohi Standard UI, which contains a general-use collection of controls such as buttons, labels, textboxes, etc. This is a retained-mode UI.
- `testbed.assets` - Contains all assets to be loaded by the testbed application.
- `testbed.kapp` - Application/.exe. The consuming application executable, loads up testbed.klib, configures/uses plugins and other Kohi libraries.
- `testbed.klib` = Shared library/.dll. Contains the application code (or "game code") specific to the application. Hot-reloadable.
- `kohi.tools.versiongen` - Application/.exe. A small utility which generates a version using passed-in major and minor version numbers, and auto-generated build and revision numbers based on date and time. Used to version builds of Kohi and plugins.
- `kohi.tools` - A collection of command-line tools. Mostly empty at the moment, but will be expended when editor development begins.
- `.vscode` A folder containing VS Code-specific project setup.

## Roadmap

See [here](TODO.md).

## Goal

The goal here is simple, to provide a resource that I wish I had when learning game development; a complete guide on building a game engine from scratch, including not only design decisions, but _why_ those decisions were made. It should also be noted that, while this is _a_ way of building a game engine, it is not _the only_ way to build one.

Of course, there is also the goal of having a game engine capable of making games. Once the project is far enough along, making a game will be done as a series on my YouTube channel as well.

It is important to note that this engine is not, and will not be for quite a while, production-ready. It is a learning tool and as such is not yet optimized for use in production-quality products. This will eventually change, but for now it is _not_ production-ready.

## Contributions

As the project progresses, community contributions are welcome via
[Pull Requests](https://github.com/travisvroman/kohi/pulls) on GitHub.

Features should be contributed via a branch name in the format of `feature/<feature name>` where `<feature name>` is replaced with either the name of a feature or, ideally, the number of a reported feature issue (ex: `feature/80` or `feature/terrain`).

Bug fixes _must_ be contributed via a branch name in the format of `bugfix/<issue#>` where `<issue#>` is replaced with the number of a reported feature issue (ex: `bugfix/80`). Bug fixes therefore _must_ have an associated issue created on GitHub.

Code should match the general style of the code in the repo. A code style guide will
be published here at some point in the near future.

All contributions are subject to review and may or may not be accepted, or have change requests made before being accepted.

## Support Me

I am developing Kohi in my spare time. I don't have any sponsors at the moment. If you like my work, please feel free to support me in these places:

- [Patreon](https://patreon.com/travisvroman)
- [Ko-fi](https://ko-fi.com/travisvroman)
- [YouTube membership](https://www.youtube.com/TravisVroman/join)
- [Subscribe on Twitch](https://www.twitch.tv/products/travisvroman)
- [Sponsor via GitHub](https://github.com/sponsors/travisvroman)

I would also greatly appreciate follows/subscriptions on YouTube and Twitch. Please spread the word!

Your support is greatly appreciated and will be re-invested back into the project.
